# RFC 3986

This doc covers _parts_ of RFC 3986, mainly those pertaining to "everyday URIs."

For example, we care very little about URIs where the host is an IP address.

"Once produced, a URI is always in its percent-encoded form."

> The URI syntax is organized hierarchically, with components listed in order of decreasing significance from left to right.

In otherwords, http is a broad scheme; a fragment is a specific part of a page or a query is a page according to certain query parameters.  THe internet is just a big tree of documnets, and this setup reflects this.

> The generic syntax uses the slash ("/"), question mark ("?"), and number sign ("#") characters to delimit components that are significant to the generic parser's hierarchical interpretation of an identifier.

Absolute URI: no fragment allowed.

"For example, defining a base URI for later use by relative references calls for an absolute-URI syntax rule that does not allow a fragment."

```
; scheme
; literal ":"
; hier-part
; optional querystring: literal "?" followed by the query
absolute-URI  = scheme ":" hier-part [ "?" query ]  ; NO fragment!

query       = *( pchar / "/" / "?" )  ; 0 or more of pchar, /, or ?
```

```
pchar         = unreserved / pct-encoded / sub-delims / ":" / "@"
```

Query:

> The query component is indicated by the first question mark ("?") character and terminated by a number sign ("#") character or by the end of the URI.


      port        = *DIGIT  ; or or more digits

Building blocks:

HEXDIG  =  DIGIT / "A" / "B" / "C" / "D" / "E" / "F"
DIGIT   =  %x30-39          ; 0 thru 9, decimal 48-5
ALPHA   =  %x41-5A / %x61-7A   ; A-Z / a-z, [chr(i) for i in range(0x41, 0x5b)]

    pct-encoded = "%" HEXDIG HEXDIG
	gen-delims  = ":" / "/" / "?" / "#" / "[" / "]" / "@"
    sub-delims  = "!" / "$" / "&" / "'" / "(" / ")" / "*" / "+" / "," / ";" / "="
	unreserved  = ALPHA / DIGIT / "-" / "." / "_" / "~"


## Syntax Notation

RFC 3986 uses ABNF, including the following core ABNF syntax rules defined by that specification:

- ALPHA (letters)
- CR (carriage return)
- DIGIT (decimal digits)
- DQUOTE (double quote)
- HEXDIG (hexadecimal digits)
- LF (line feed)
- SP (space)

## Characters and Percent-Encoding

A URI is composed from a limited set of characters consisting of digits, letters, and a few graphic symbols.

If you have a page from Al Jazeera Arabic open in your browser, it may display literal Unicode characters in Arabic.

This is done by the browser.  Copy and paste that URL and you will see the encoded form.

See 2.1.  Percent-Encoding - it's important.

For consistency, URI producers and normalizers should use uppercase hexadecimal digits for all percent- encodings.

## Comparison of URIs

Comparison is done via string coomparison.

comparison methods are designed to minimize false negatives while strictly avoiding false positives.

character-per-character rather than byte-per-byte basis
- this means codepoint per-codepoint after conversion to a common character encoding.

there is some normalization that gets applied before comparison occurs

- hex digits within a percent-encoding are case-insensitive (normalized to uppercase)
- scheme and host normalized to lowercase (HTTP://www.EXAMPLE.com/ becomes http://www.example.com/)
- Percent-Encoding Normalization: some URI producers percent-encode octets that do not require percent-encoding (i.e. ascii printable charaacters)
	- decoding any percent-encoded octet that corresponds to an unreserved character, as described in Section 2.3
- Scheme-Based Normalization:

   because the "http" scheme makes use of an authority component, has a
   default port of "80", and defines an empty path to be equivalent to
   "/", the following four URIs are equivalent:

      http://example.com
      http://example.com/
      http://example.com:/
      http://example.com:80/
